Scott Hanselman Thursday, November
10, 2011, most comprehensive suite
of components in this episode
about the history of HTTP
and the world wide web.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman,
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
we're sitting down with a
pretty interesting person, Henrik Nielsen.
He is a data engineer
and computer scientist, and he
did some really interesting work
early on, on the worldwide
web. How are you, sir?
So we, you and I
are within five years of
each other's age, but I
think while I was fooling
around in high school, you
were getting your master's degree
in, in engineering, in, in
Denmark. And then you met
an interesting person when you
went to work at CERN.
Can you tell us a
little bit about that? Yes,
I, I, a long, long
time ago when I was
a student, I figured out
that it is very convenient
to travel out and do
things as a student because
you can sort of just
drop into place and then
be there for a little
while and leave again and
have some great experiences. And
so I looked around actually
to where to do my
masters while I was at
Danish university. And I talked
to somebody who talked to
somebody who knew a guy
who was sitting at the
turn and say, well, this
guy is doing some interesting
stuff. We don't know exactly
what it is. He's calling
it, something, something, something web,
but it's very interesting. So
you should go talk to
him. So I went down
and, and certainly in, in
the, on the Swiss French
border, just outside Geneva. And
so I went down there
and visited and I met
Tim Bonusly who would buy
that, that was back in
93. He had formally proposed
the web as a concept
in 89, I believe, and
was working with, there were
two or three students sort
of associated roughly with his,
with his group, plus a
couple of, of, of certain
people plus plus 10. But
that was about it. There
were about five people on
and off. And so he
was very off your chest.
He said, yes, great, come
on in and sit down.
And, and that's how I
effectively started working on the
web that was in. So
I had to go back
and pack my, my, my
stuff and all that kind
of stuff. But I came
down in, in basically January
94, moved to CERN as
a what's it called a
technical students, and then started
working on, on, on web
technology as it was being
developed. And very specifically what
it is by working on
some library code library called
zip www that has the,
the old sort of Unix
naming style that had the
first 18 mil brow. So
it has some HDP implementation.
Most of it was actually
done by Tim himself, plus
another guy that helped doing
some of this stuff. And
I helped and continue developing
this together with another student
from Finland. And that's how
the, the, the certain server
sort of came to be,
there was something called the
Lima browse and other kinds
of things. And then after
a little while, I think
he was in March where
the first March of 94,
where the first web conference
ever was held and it
was held at CERN and
they were about 300 people.
And that was the entire
community who knew about the
web in the world effectively.
So Marc Andreesen was the,
a few other people from
around the world we've been
looking at. There was some
other browsers at that time,
there were people who have
been putting off websites, Slack
physics labs has also put
up, put up a website.
And so that was the
entire, it was very exciting,
sort of be part of
that, that gang of 300.
So people basically with everybody
who had been either putting
on a web server or
starting writing browsers or working
on servers and those kinds
of stuff, and that's how
it pretty much does. So
at that time you said
there's about 300 people in
the room, and that's basically
everyone on the planet that
knows everything about the web.
Are there less than 300
websites at this point? Oh,
yes, there was. At that
time, Tim basically had a
little webpage where he wrote
the, there was the first
index of webpages and it
could stay on the single
page. So there were not
a lot. So it was
just a page that was
like a list of all
the other pages on the
internet. So, And that, that
website was called info.ch, which
was the place where the
initial specs, where the, this
page off of, of websites
and a bunch of other
information was posted for a
long time. When, when, when
you first heard about this
idea of the web, had
I assumed you were using
Telnet? I mean, I remember
at that time I was
probably using something like CompuServe
and I was, you know,
dialing into universities and Tel
netting. And even before that
I was using bulletin board
systems. Was there, was there
a sense, or did you,
were you already drawn to
the idea of an interconnected
group of computers? I didn't
quite realize the power of,
of the interconnectedness in a
global scale because it's, it's
hard to, to, to get
a grasp until you sort
of see it. I was
immediately taken by the, the,
the idea of this information
space that everybody can participate
to produce information and to
consume information and to exchange
information and to have a
common place for talking about
things. I think there was
there, wasn't a very exciting
idea. I think one of
the, one of the times
where it kind of clicked
sort of personally was really
when you started was both
on the West side, but
also just with using email
on things that you could
send emails, for example, one
of the times, and now
it sounds of course naive
is that there was a,
a Unix girl called Stevens
who wrote some very good
Unix books for networking and
for the TTP stack and
whatnot. And I was reading
that because it was programming
some of the stuff in
this library. And there were
a piece of DNS that
I couldn't understand what he
was doing. And so he
had his email on, on
one of his books. And
so I sent him an
email, which was kind of
like, I might as well
send off a probe to
Mars because I had no
idea sort of what the
person was and where, where
it was. And he answered.
And that was kind of
saying, Oh my goodness, this
is, this is really powerful.
This being able to communicate,
obviously by this was an
email that the web sort
of took that to another
level was something that I
think many, many people sort
of have to, they have
an internal realization saying, Oh,
my, this is really powerful.
And then you get on
board and then it's just,
then there's just no going
back. So that was one
of those, those, those moments
where you realize that this
is going to be a
thing. Yes, absolutely. So you
worked with, with Tim Berners-Lee
and the, the W3C, the
worldwide web consortium. And now
when I think of the
worldwide web consortium, I think
of it rarely. I think
of it when I have
to go and dig deep
into a specification to find
out whether or not something
works the way that it's
supposed to work. And I
often find myself poking around
inside of the, the HTTP
specification and saying, was this
intended to do this? And
you were one of the
primary authors of that. How
does that work? You just
sit in a room and
think it up, or is
it a series of meetings
when you're off inventing Something
like HTP and writing it
down to the detail, where
are you and what are
you doing when this is
happening? Well, the way I
say it is that it's,
it's understanding very early on
that this is a collective
effort by a lot of
people. And that is not
very much somebody sitting and,
and dreaming up the, the
idea idea. I would say,
obviously Tim dreamed up the
initial idea and, and, and
how the protocol can work,
but that's a lot of
details for whether they should
using, what language would you
use to describe how, what
is the format, whether it's
a syntax, what the semantics
around it. And there there's
a lot of choices and
effectively, they are always engineering.
Compromises takes early on sort
of email style hit us.
It's called RCA 22 has
sort of name, call and
value as being the language
of HTTP that was introduced
in HTTP 1.0, before that
it was actually just a
one line, which said yet.
And then the UI that
you want to get, there
was no metadata around it.
So all those kinds of
things I'd say evolved. It
was not somebody sitting locked
in a room thinking about
it. It was writing code,
interacting with people, seeing what
the scenarios were very much
being part of a vibrant
community where people wanted to
do. Then for example, HTML
forms came about. So post
was, was, was, well, I
remember one detail for Sam
of doing put, you can
obviously do put content off
to a web server. And
in, in one point, Oh,
what we had was that
you just send the document
with, with, with right, with
the put up front. I
mean, and I was doing
some experiments where I was
sitting at that time. It
was, I was sitting moved
to, to MIT with a
web consortium, but we were
still playing around with a
server back at CERN. So
I did put cross advantage.
And we realized that sometimes
if you do an authentication
and you go sort of
back, you said, you're not
allowed to post a document
over here. You could actually
lose the response the way
that ACP was formulated. So
we had to add something
called a second little, this
is what these one-on-one temporary,
or 100 continued messages was
introduced. History should be in
order to get around those
kinds of things. So many
of those things were really,
obviously there was some fundamental,
the way I say is
that you come up with
some basic principles that you
would like to adhere to.
Some of them was that
is document oriented. That is
hyper, hyper driven. That is
based on your eyes. And
that is stateless. That means
that is you have no,
you don't have sessions. You
don't have anything like that.
I want you to solve,
pick your, your set of
principles up front. Then the
rest of it is about
filling in the gaps and
figuring out how does this
work? How does this work
and how does that work
and build code? And one
of the things that I
think has always been at,
at, at hot of both
ITF and also WPC, obviously
see, it's sort of inherited
from my TF is the
internet engineering task force for
folks exactly that that's where
the typical sort of RSC
acronym comes from. That those
are documents that are published
by that organization. And both
them both. They also have
published a TCP and IP
and DNS and effectively. They
are the, they are to
the internet, to what, what,
what consortium has been to
the, to the web in
terms of sort of driving
the core specifically. And the
key piece there has always
been, what's called rough consensus
and running code. That means
that you get into a
room. You don't agree on
everything, but you have rough
consensus for saying this is
roughly the right thing. And
then you basically have two
or more implementations that work
together. So you have to
demonstrate the things work. And
that is a great way
for getting beyond my thing
is prettier than your thing
kind of discussions where you
can discuss that till the
cows come home at the
end of the day is
really, the focus has always
been, yes, that's great, but
we need to have running
code. You need to demonstrate
that it runs not just
in your lab or between
two machines can run globally.
And that's where you, you
can, you can't sit down
and think that through it,
that's too many variables and
too many unknowns and too
many quirks that you have
to work with. And so
it really takes a community
to come up with a
spec. And it was very
much develop as a, as
a community. There was a
basic principles that they started
out with what, what, what
Tim had in terms of
the basic things that we
just talked about. But on
top of that, it's really
about the community pitching in
saying, this is, this is
great, but why don't we
add this? Why don't we
add that? And, and then
it rolls from them. And
so effectively the most productive
and most successful specifically
work that I've been part
of have always been where
the, the working group has
been working in tandem with
it developed implementations. So it's
not that the working group
goes out and dreams about
something often. Then the implementation
has come later. It's really
the implementations and the specification
go hand in hand. That's
really, that's a really a
fascinating idea, cause it's a,
it's, it should be a
guiding concept for everything that
went with that we design.
I think that there's a
lot of times when people
spend hours and hours in
front of a whiteboard brainstorming
things and, and then being
very congratulatory once the white
boarding is done, but you're
right. Once you have an
implementation you're only half done,
but you know, to complete
working implementations, presumably written by
different people, talking to each
other is a really great
way to confirm that things
are, are working as you
specify them. And as you
imagine them, and certainly no
better way than to find
the bugs and the specification
than to actually try to
implement it. Yes. Yes. And,
and, and in fact, the
HTTP specification work has actually
just recently undergone right now,
as we speak undergoing a
big editorial revision, it's called
the, the HTTP vis work,
which is updating HTTP spec
with a lot of clarification
about how things work by
deploying reputations already. There might
be places where the spec
is on clear. There's a
lot of things that's been
cleared up, but in a
sense, the, the, the critical
aspect of it is that
the spec becomes more of
a historic documents then that,
because it kind of captures
what is, what is working,
but it's out there. What
is, what is available today?
And that's, I think is
the critical aspect of what
a, what a spec it
should be. It's kind of
it documents, what is out,
what is working, that's what
it should be doing if
it is, if it defines
and say, every time you
do something, you have to
go to that document to
figure out what the idea
was. Then you don't have
this interaction between deployed implementations
and, and the specifications. This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by careers.
2.0 careers, 2.0 is a
new service by our friends
at stack overflow. You're probably
all familiar with stack overflow.
The online QA resource dedicated
specifically to programmers and programming
related topics. Well, the team
at stack overflow created careers
2.0 to provide you with
access to great jobs and
introduce you to a bunch
of great companies that you
might consider working for, even
if you're not currently looking
for a job, think of
careers. 2.0 is a programmer
profile, gives you a platform
to show that you're awesome
by featuring your proudest contributions
to stack overflow, GitHub SourceForge
Bitbucket, anything programming related, you
can even add your favorite
programming books from amazon.com profiles
on careers. 2.0 are free.
They're easy to get started,
especially by importing your LinkedIn
profile. However, there's one catch
profiles on career 2.0 or
invite only they did this
to keep out the spam
and have a high quality
environment. Fortunately, for you as
a Hansel minutes listener, I've
got your back head on
over to careers dot stack
overflow.com/h M to accept your
invitation today, once again, that's
careers dot stack, overflow.com/m. I
hope you like it. How,
how many times now, some,
you probably know that specification
backwards and forwards because even
though, well, it was a
huge community effort. You're kind
of the note taker and
the facilitator, and you're actually
typing up, you know, one
of the principal authors for
typing it up. How many
times have you discovered that
you thought you had it
completely solid and you thought
the spec was clear, and
there's a section of the
spec that is completely and
totally unclear, and then is
being fixed, you know, 10,
12, 15 years later. I'd
say that actually is by
far the most common, the
it's so happens that what
somebody feels is, is clear,
turns out always to be
unclear to somebody else. And
in fact, one of the,
one of the key pieces,
and this is one thing
that, that is rarely appreciated
as part of a working
group, is that as part
of going through a working
group and the ACP working
group was, was big. At
some point, I think probably
a hundred, 200 people, not
all participating, but sort of
reading and sometimes just pitching
in and doing, but sort
of having good suggestions and
all that kind of things.
One of the key aspects
is that it's a collective
education of that group of
people for getting shared context
for what this document actually
is supposed to mean, because
you can only write it
up to certain point in,
in English, always be questions
about, well, how does this
work if you do this?
And the face of the
moon is exactly that and
those kinds of things. And
what happens is that the
group of people off of
hundred or so through this
process have solved part of
the specification. And then they
go out and implement it
also. And it kind of
grows from there. So it's
not, we try cost to
capture a lot of that
in, in, in the document,
but there's also a tremendous
set of knowledge in the
email aliases. And just in
how people get a better
understanding of what's going on.
This might be an, an
ignorant question on my part
and forgive me. But do
you ever feel like you're
surprised that it works Okay.
Well, the way I'd say
it is that I think
some of the design in
sense, I was, I was
very lucky because I did
not have any internet experience.
I did not have any
distributed computing experience when I
started working on, on, on
the web. So I really
didn't come in with a
preconceived notion of saying well,
but this is not a
distributed Apia system, or this
is not a distributed file
system, or this is not
transactional, or I didn't have
any of those sort of
preconceived notions about what would
work or not. And I
don't think that was any
question that it would work.
It was clear that there
were a lot of discussion
about whether the protocol was
what's clunky and whether it
was wasteful. And we have,
I had lots of discussions
with others, people who had
developed other solutions that were
very technically, you can say
more elegant in certain ways,
they were separated better out.
They had, for example, one
of the things we never
did, if he is, we
didn't, you cannot have sex
response is out of order.
So when you send a
request on a single TCP
connection, the response has to
come back before you can
send another request. And we
never sort of say, well,
I can send two requests
and then I can get
the last request, the response
first. And so I can
get them out order, which
has some can have some
significant performance optimizations. We never
did that because that will
break existing ACP and limitations.
But there were other solutions
that went down this route.
And when, when that way,
and you could say from
a network optimization from a
usability point, it's sort of
from a network usage point
of view, they were, they
were better in certain ways.
What I learned though, is
that that's not really what
matters most, what matter most
is that you provide value
to what people want to
do. And this idea that
you could just stop a
web server, pointed it out,
they share, and now serve
those documents, whether those were
HTML documents or PDF documents
or whatever else, images you
could just serve them was
a tremendous value to, to,
to the community and to
people who wanted to expose
information and to create information.
And so this idea that
you could build things that
were more elegant, more efficient,
all those kinds of things
is true. But what I
learned is that never, never
try and sit in front
off of this efficiency argument.
If the solution is just
to put in another server,
if you still, if you're
sitting in front of the
brute force and saying, well,
if I just put in
another server, I'm fine is
a very hot argument to
say, well, but if you
change your infrastructure completely, you
don't have to do that.
That is a very hard
argument often to do because
the, the, the, the value
of the network is, goes
up exponentially with the number
of nodes participating in it.
And as soon as one
combination takes off, the value
of the network becomes huge.
And so changing out from
that, that way of communicating
is, is almost insurmountable. So
in a sense, you can
say, well, there'll be, it
is funny because I was
at many conferences where I
heard, especially from, from TCP
transport, people who were objecting
to how, especially SEP 1.0
use TCP, which was kind
of wasteful in many ways.
And they say that I
had many arguments saying, well,
if this is a stupid
protocol, because it does use
TCP in the right way,
and it doesn't do this.
And it has speak request
headers of many, many hundreds
of fights for, for requests
and responses also wasteful and
those kinds of things. And
while that's all true, the
alternatives were not able to,
to break the momentum of
HTTP simply because the value
was too high. And that's
the, that I think a
very useful lesson that you
can engineering. It's a practical
way of building stuff. And,
and, and sometimes you have
the luxury of doing things
multiple times, but often when
you come up with something,
it really is a balance
between that the level of
entry, how complicated is to
get up and running your
system is a, a, a
huge factor in the system
taking off. And if it
has the right properties, then
performance is something that can
come down the line. That
is a powerful concept. And
the idea that people want
to be agile and people
talk about agile methods, but
sometimes doing a big spec
upfront and really thinking deeply
about it and doing small
prototypes is a very valuable
way to get something done.
It may come out looking
like a big design up
front, but it was actually
a number of small iterative
things. Like you said, you
can do, you can do
a performance a little bit
later, but I wouldn't S
would you say that these
kinds of specifications and the
internet itself was done in
an agile way? Because if
you look at something like
HTTP, it hasn't really changed
in a while. I mean,
things sit on top of
it, but the essence is
still there, you know, 14.
Yes. The essence is absolutely.
They are still, and also
all the quirks of their,
for example, even today, they
are five or six ways
that you can, in fact,
the limit an HTP message,
how long it is, which
in, from a sort of
a pure protocol point of
view seems excessive. Normally you
would say, well, what can
I just have a bite
count that I, I need
to read in one place?
And then I can understand
what the message is. One
message ends and the other
one's sauce, but SEP doesn't
have, it has five ways.
And the, for that is
because, well, it started out
not having any way whatsoever.
And then we had to
add ways to it. And
there were different ways of
adding it and some were
successful and some were sort
of successful. And so, but
they all stuck. And so
now we have this, this
aggregation of various teachers, and,
and you can come up
with something that, from a
clean slate, that is a
much more efficient in many
ways, from that perspective, but
it's, it's gonna be a
uphill battle to convince everybody
to change You. So you
went to work for Microsoft
in 99 after you left
the W3C. And what have
you been working on lately?
Well, the web has stayed
with me, or I stayed
with the web throughout my
career in one way or
the other, because I've, I've,
I'm fascinated by the potential
and the oval idea and,
and the ability for people
to communicate and exchange information,
I think is, is extraordinary.
What I'm, what I'm doing
at different times has been
tying kind of expanding where
you can use the web
technologies. One aspect that I
was working on a couple
of years ago was building
robotics, robotics frameworks, where you
can say, well, what has
robots to do with web
technology? But it turns out
that they actually, you can
use a lot of web
technology, a lot of, of,
of ideas behind how document
oriented using your eyes, being
able to, to inspect by
putting a browse on looking
at what's going on matches
very, very well with something
like robotics. And so I've
been trying to push web
technology into new areas where
traditionally it hasn't been, been
part of it. Robots were,
were great, fun. They, they
are just the idea to,
to, to my heart because
they, it just, the fact
that they move around is
your laptop look so, so
much less interesting things that
move around. That's just interesting,
more interesting. And they also,
that they taught me a
bunch of interesting things about
other aspects that Microsoft has
been looking into a lot
like enterprise computing with reliable
messaging and transactions and those
kinds of things. And some
of the things we can
learn is that, well, if
a robot rolls off a
cliff, no amount of transactions
over reliable messaging or any
of those kinds of things
that typically have been deployed
in enterprises work because the
robot is gone and you
have to figure out what
are you going to do
now that actually works great
with web technology because the
web technology has always say,
well, we're going to do
the best effort. We'll be
not going to just stop
working. If a server is
down, we going to try
and do something else. What
I'm doing now is, is
trying to take the same,
same ideas for, for building
web platforms and merchandise into
a cloud scenarios where we
can provide a much easier
way for you to build
web API in particular. W
one of the things we'll
be focusing on is, is
that the initial sets of
web servers where ILO file
servers, or they were HTML,
they w wrapping HTML around
back in processes. They could
either use CGI, which was
like this, or a way
of communicating with the packing
process or some of the
backend process drain. It generated
some data. And now the
web servers responsibility was to
put HTML, anchor brackets around
that data and the presented
through it so that it
could be consumed with browser
HTML five and, and, and
JavaScript has changed that in
the sense that what happens
now is that a lot
of the rendering can happen
on the browser side. So
the server doesn't have to
put eight HTML around the
data. It just exposes that
data as what we call
web APIs, where you can
now program directly against these,
these APIs that give you,
and then build all the
rendering as part of your
HTML five application. And so
that means that there's a
big push to, towards building
these kinds of new applications,
because they could be consumed
both by, by browsers, by
mobile devices and across the
board, across, across a set
of devices that might render
things differently. But now they
can do the rendering locally
rather than having the data
coming at ND and the
presentation coming straight from the
server being tailored to that
device. And so what I'm
working on now is to
provide a new framework, which
hopefully will be available in
the not too distant future,
where we can show some
of the ways that you
can build very lightweight, very
efficient web APIs using the
full force of SDP, where
you have sort of great
access to, to hit us
and to mess up. So
you can, you can set
caching semantics. You can, you
can set whatever you want
to set all around and
has just an old great
experience for you to build
a, these API and deploy
them into the cloud. One
last question I always wanted
to ask someone who works
so closely on the internet
is if, if you could
explain to myself and to
our listeners, what HTTP status
code four 18 is. Hi,
Familiar with it as
a, is related to RFC
2324, the hypertext coffee pot.
Oh, yes, yes, indeed. Yes.
So Larry messenger, who was
the working group chair followed
up on a, on a
proud tradition in ITF for,
for writing what is called
April fools specifications. I think
it goes all the way
back to the seventies, 75
or 76 of where the
first of those were published.
And they had along over
the years, they actually had
great sense of humor. One
was to, one of the
ones I remember is to
send electricity over IP, which
of course is a inherently
impossible thing to do, but
it was all about sort
of doing things that at
the, at the front actually
look plausible, but this is
something that ultimately didn't make
sense. The message. I had
this great idea of writing
the coffee pot control protocol
as an HTTP protocol. And
he published it as an
April 1st, April fools joke. And
I think there was a
actually a great, and I
believe it is at least
in our C 26 16.
It is one of the
formal references. If you look
very carefully at the back
of the document, it actually
referenced as a form of
document supporting the SGP 1.1
specification And the, and the
form of a four 18
status code is in the
spec right now, as you
search, Oh, wait, it's in
the spec right now. Great.
Perfect. I love it. Yeah.
People can check those out
April fool's day RFC. Yeah.
And the thing was that
actually was so that you
could in fact build it
as a protocol. It was
not just a thought experiment.
You could actually do it.
And I believe somebody has
done it. I, I seem
to remember somebody posting that
they actually implemented it. I
had little webcam. So you
could show the state of
the, of the coffee pot.
Yeah. It's much more fun
if you're going to do
something like this, you need
to actually implement it. Someone
in 2009 proposed doing IPV
six over a social network.
So someone ended up implementing
it. There's no reason not
to. So they ended up
implementing IPV six over Facebook
itself. Yes. Yes. And you
could, all those things are
absolutely Okay. On one hand,
they are a great front
because they poke sort of
poke fun at the layering
and, and, and the, the
modulation using modules for, for
thinking about the protocol stack.
Because of course you can
always take somebody, something that
sits at the bottom, see
it, and then put it
at the top at the
very top of the stack.
But it actually is a
Testament that you think about
it to how the layering
kind of works because the,
it works because you can
take something that sits at
the bottom and it's independent
of what is both below
and above. And you can
then put it in another,
you can reach off the
stack and put it in
another spot in the sec
and still make it work
from a practical point of
view and performance point of
view. It doesn't work good.
It's A good lesson in
that. It kind of tells
indirectly that the layering works.
It does. And that really
is a Testament to the
web itself. It, it works
and, and we appreciate your
role in helping make that
Henrik Nielsen. Thanks so much
for chatting with us today.
Thank you so much. It
was great fun. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.